docs: add documentation style guide for community and AI-assisted contributions (#2054)
lemonade-sdk/lemonade: docs/dev/documentation.md

# Documentation Guide

Lemonade's documentation is a first-class part of the product. Per our [philosophy](./philosophy.md): if the document is long and full of conditionals, the feature isn't done yet. Good documentation is short, accurate, and self-evident.

This guide covers style, structure, and the contribution process for both community authors and AI-assisted contributions.

> ---

Reviewer: This guide says docs with 5 or more H2 sections should include a ToC. Since this file has more than 5 H2 sections, could we add a small table of contents here before the first horizontal rule?

## Principles

### Documentation completes the feature

> A feature isn't shipped until users can find, understand, and act on it without asking for help. Treat every doc PR the same as a code PR: reviewable, mergeable, improvable.

Reviewer 2: Docs and code should be a single PR most of the time. "Here's the code, I'll write the docs later" usually means never!

Maybe that wasn't the intent here but it does imply that code-only PRs are fine.

### Automate the documentation away

Long docs signal a design problem, not a thoroughness problem. If you find yourself adding paragraph after paragraph of conditionals and edge cases, bring the issue back to the feature and simplify.

> ### Shorter is better, not briefer

Reviewer 2: I don't understand this heading.

"Short" doesn't mean "skip context." It means every sentence earns its place. Remove sentences that restate the title, define terms the reader knows, or describe what's visible in a code example.

> ### The reader is a capable adult

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### The reader is capable
```

Don't exclude capable students ;)

Don't pad with reassurances ("This is easy!") or apologies ("Unfortunately…"). State facts.

---

## Voice and Tone

| Attribute | Do | Don't |
|---|---|---|
| Register | Professional and direct | Formal or stiff |
| Warmth | Welcoming, community-first | Condescending or presumptuous |

> | Pronouns | "you" for the reader; "we" for the project | "the user", "one" |

Reviewer 2: What about when "you' is a developer and "the user" is their user?

| Contractions | Fine in prose | Avoid in parameter descriptions or API tables |
| Emoji | 🍋 in the main README and taglines only | Scattered through guides |

> | Humor | A single dry observation is fine | Extended jokes or memes |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| Humor | Avoid in technical documentation | Jokes or memes |
```

> | Humor | A single dry observation is fine | Extended jokes or memes |

Reviewer 2: Suggest adding a row for figures of speech as well, such as "your millage may vary". Since this is a global project and such sayings are usual local, we should use literal language.

> | Humor | A single dry observation is fine | Extended jokes or memes |

Reviewer 2: Suggest adding a row to leave avoid marketing language.

Good (facts): "This feature does X"
Bad (marketing): "This feature is the best at X"

- H1 (`#`): document title, one per file.
- H2 (`##`): major sections — prerequisites, steps, parameters.
- H3 (`###`): subsections within a major section.
- H4 (`####`): use sparingly; restructure if you need H5.

Make heading text scannable and action-oriented: "Install on Ubuntu", not "Installation".

### Table of contents

Add a ToC only if the document has **5 or more H2 sections**. Use a plain markdown list with anchor links. Place it directly after the opening paragraph.

---

## Formatting

### Code blocks

Always include a language tag.

````markdown
```bash
lemonade run Gemma-4-E2B-it-GGUF
```
````

Common tags: `bash`, `powershell`, `python`, `json`, `cpp`, `typescript`, `yaml`.

Use `bash` for shell commands that work cross-platform (curl, lemonade CLI). Use `powershell` only for Windows-specific syntax.

Annotate code sparingly — only when the command has a non-obvious flag or the output is surprising. Never restate what the code visibly does.

### Multi-platform variants

Use MkDocs tab syntax when a task has meaningfully different steps per OS. Keep the tab names consistent across documents: `Windows`, `Linux`, `macOS`.

```markdown
=== "Linux"

>     ```bash

Reviewer: This Markdown example contains nested fenced code blocks. Could we use four backticks for the outer fence, like the earlier example in this file, so the inner bash block renders correctly?

    sudo apt install lemonade
    ```

=== "Windows"
    Download the installer from the releases page.
```

> Don't create tabs for minor differences (a single flag change, a different path). Use a `>` note instead.

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure I like this rule. I prefer docs where the code snippets are copy-pastable, which means each variant should be present.

### Tables

Use tables for:
- API parameters (always)
- Platform or feature matrices
- Comparisons of 3+ items

Don't use tables for:
- Two-item comparisons (use a list)

> - Simple key-value pairs when prose reads better

Reviewer 2: This is unclear to me. Tables can read a lot cleaner even for two-item comparisons and key-value pairs.

Column header convention: Title Case. Align pipes. Include a header separator row.

```markdown
| Parameter | Required | Description |
|-----------|----------|-------------|
| `model`   | Yes      | Model name from the registry. |
```

### Inline formatting

- **Bold**: key terms on first use, UI labels, file names when emphasis aids scanning.
- `Inline code`: CLI commands, parameter names, file paths, values, environment variables.

> - *Italics*: titles of external works, or occasional emphasis in prose. Not for technical terms.

Reviewer 2: Style question for this doc: sometimes above you escape markdown style syntax, but here the styles will be applied. Can it be consistent one way other the other?

```

**Naming:** lowercase, hyphen-separated. Match the CLI or feature name where one exists (`cli.md`, `multi-model.md`).

**One topic per file.** A file that covers installation *and* configuration *and* troubleshooting should be three files with a README index.

**Every directory must have a `README.md`** that briefly explains the section and links to its files. Keep READMEs under 30 lines; they are navigation aids, not content.

---

## Writing for AI-Assisted Contributions

AI tools can draft documentation faster than most people can type. That speed comes with specific failure modes you must check before submitting.

### What AI gets wrong in docs

| Failure mode | What to look for |
|---|---|
| Hallucinated parameters | Parameter names, defaults, or behaviors that don't match the actual code |
| Stale information | Correct as of the training data, wrong today (version numbers, endpoint paths, flags) |
| Padding | Restatements, filler phrases ("It is worth noting that…"), over-explained obvious steps |
| Invented caveats | Warnings about edge cases that don't exist in this codebase |
| Wrong tone | AI defaults to formal or hedged; Lemonade docs are direct and confident |

> | Generic examples | Examples using placeholder models or endpoints not in the registry |

Reviewer: Good AI-failure-mode table. One failure mode I’d add: AI-assisted rewrites often remove important existing content while making the prose look cleaner. For example:
```text
| Lossy rewriting | Existing prerequisites, warnings, examples, version constraints, links, or product-specific details disappear during a rewrite |`
```
This feels important because the current checklist focuses on verifying added content, but not on preserving already-correct content (among the changes that must be made).

> | Generic examples | Examples using placeholder models or endpoints not in the registry |

Reviewer 2: Another one: slop-style writing such as
- Excessive use of em dashes
- Use of the word "honest", ever
- "It's not X, it's Y"

### Checklist before submitting an AI-drafted doc

- [ ] Every parameter name and default verified against the source code or a live server.

> - [ ] All CLI commands run locally and produced the expected output.

Reviewer 2: Same for curl commands and test script invocations

- [ ] All links resolve to real pages.

> - [ ] No sentences that begin with "It is important to note", "Please ensure", or "It's worth mentioning".

Reviewer 2: This seems oddly specific for a final checklist. Perhaps "meets all do's and don'ts for Lemonade style and AI-generated prose"

Reviewer: let me propose:

 [ ] All internal links, anchors, external links, and referenced files resolve correctly. 

Instead of "All links resolve to real pages." // just searched for the line but I'm sure you will get it.

> - [ ] Code examples use real Lemonade model names from the registry, not `<your-model-here>`.

Reviewer 2: Also too specific; code, scripts, curl commands, etc. must all be executable per the rules above.

> - [ ] The document passes the length test: if it's longer than it needs to be, cut it.

Reviewer 2: Not specific enough

> - [ ] The document was reviewed by its human author, not just the AI that wrote it.

Reviewer: Could we add one checklist item for preservation during rewrites? Something like:

```text
- [ ] For edits to existing docs, compare against the previous version and confirm no required prerequisites, warnings, links, examples, commands, or product-specific constraints were removed. 
```

AI tools are especially prone to “cleaning up” docs by deleting details that looked noisy but were actually important.

### Disclosing AI assistance

You are not required to disclose that AI helped draft your documentation PR, but you *are* responsible for its accuracy. "The AI wrote it" is not a response to a correctness review comment.

If you use an AI tool to generate review comments on a documentation PR, label them clearly so human reviewers can weigh them appropriately:

```
[AI-assisted review] The parameter description in the table doesn't mention the default value.
```

---

> ## Community Contribution Process

Reviewer 2: High overlap between this section, the sections above, and contribute.md. Is this section necessary or can it be folded into the above?

### Before you start

- Read the [philosophy](./philosophy.md). Ask yourself: does this doc make Lemonade simpler or more complex for a new reader?
- For substantial new sections (a new integration guide, a new concept page), post in `#documentation` on the [Discord](https://discord.gg/5xXzkMu8Zk) first. The maintainer for content and guides is `@vgodsoe`.
- For corrections, typo fixes, or small additions: just open a PR.

### What belongs in a documentation PR

A documentation PR should touch one of:
- A new file for a new feature, integration, or concept.
- An update to an existing file to correct errors or reflect new behavior.
- A structural improvement (reorganizing a directory, adding a missing README).

Don't bundle documentation changes with code changes unless the doc change is a direct consequence of the code change and the combined PR is small.

### Review expectations

Documentation PRs are reviewed for:

1. **Accuracy** — does it match what the code actually does?
2. **Alignment with the philosophy** — does it make Lemonade simpler to understand?
3. **Style** — does it follow this guide?
4. **Links** — do they all resolve?

> Reviewers will not reject a PR for minor style differences. They will reject a PR for factual errors, broken links, or content that contradicts the philosophy.

Reviewer 2: Redundant with the "final checklist"? Can we collapse into a single section?

### Maintainer for documentation

> `@vgodsoe` is the primary maintainer for content and guides. Assign them on PRs that touch `docs/guide/` or `docs/integrations/`. For API reference (`docs/api/`), also assign the maintainer responsible for the relevant backend or API standard.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`@jeremyfowers` is the primary maintainer for content and guides. Assign them on PRs that touch `docs/guide/` or `docs/integrations/`. For API reference (`docs/api/`), also assign the maintainer responsible for the relevant backend or API standard.
```

| `you should` / `you must` | Just state the requirement: "Run `setup.sh` before building." |
| Passive voice | Rewrite with an active subject |
| Future tense for current behavior | Use present tense: "The server loads models on first request." |
| Nested bullet points deeper than 2 levels | Restructure as prose or a table |

### Template: integration guide

```markdown
# [App Name]

Connect Lemonade to [App Name] to [one-sentence description of what this enables].

## Prerequisites

- Lemonade Server running on `localhost:13305` ([install guide](../guide/install/README.md))
- [App Name] [version] installed

## Setup

1. Launch Lemonade: `lemonade launch`
2. Open [App Name] and navigate to **Settings → Model Provider**.
3. Set the base URL to `http://localhost:13305/v1`.
4. (Optional) Set the API key to any non-empty string if [App Name] requires one.

## Verify

Run a test prompt. You should see Lemonade's model name appear in [App Name]'s model selector.

## See also

- [App Name documentation](https://example.com)
- [Lemonade API reference](../api/openai.md)
```

### Template: CLI command reference

```markdown

> ## `lemonade <command>`

Reviewer: Same nested-fence issue here: the outer markdown example should probably use four backticks so the inner bash fences render as part of the example.
